---
layout: post
title: Working with chroot environment
tags: chroot, linux, jail
category: blog
permalink: /blog/chroot/
author: sachin
comments: true
---

This post covers what/why `chroot`? and also steps to create `chroot`
environment.

As its man page says, "*it is used to run commands or an interactive
shell with special root directory*". It provides an environment to
test new packages in a secured way without touching an actual system.
It can be called as a virtual system with isolated root(/)

## Why chroot environment ?

Suppose I have a new package to test and compile with many
dependencies. Also I may have to compile each and every dependent
package till my requirement for the test-package is met. This process
can make my development machine highly unstable or sometime unusable,
this is certainly not I want. The best way I can deal with this is to
create a virtual machine, I can use
[Qemu](http://wiki.qemu.org/Main_Page) or
[Virtual Box](https://www.virtualbox.org/) for that or I can make a
`chroot` environment in a separate directory and start working.
`chroot` environments are also used to host web-servers, so if at all
the web-server is compromised, not all the services are hampered and
the physical machine is still safe.

An advantage of having a `chroot` environment is the file-system is
totally isolated from the physical host. **chroot** has a separate
file-system inside the file-system, the difference is, it uses a newly
created root(/) as its root directory.

## Building a chroot environment

For `chroot`, we need to create a file-system. The file hierarchy
within the directory is same as any other Linux file-system
such as `/root`, `/usr`, `/etc`, `/bin`, `/opt` etc.
We can make a Debian chroot environment using **debootstrap** or
`rootstock`, both are available for Ubuntu systems.
In this post I will use debootstrap to create a chroot
environment.

Install **debootstrap** using,

    sudo apt-get install debootstrap

We can specify a system architecture, a suite(release name) and a
mirror to download from in the `debootstrap` parameter.

The syntax is as follows,

    debootstrap --arch <ARCHITECTURE> <SUITE> <YOUR-ROOT-DIRECTORY> <MIRROR>

for example, if I want arch to be `i686` of Ubuntu 12.04(precise)
and my root directory is **precise-chroot/** with mirror as
<http://archive.ubuntu.com/ubuntu>, then create directory for chroot

    mkdir precise-chroot

and create a chroot environment using debootstrap

    debootstrap --arch i686 precise precise-chroot http://archive.ubuntu.com/ubuntu

this will create a chroot environment for Ubuntu 12.04, from the
mirror.

## chroot'ing

Once all the file are downloaded, we can chroot into
`precise-chroot/` directory using

    sudo chroot precise-chroot /bin/bash

where `precise-chroot` is the root directory, and the shell is
`/bin/bash`. You will be landed with the root prompt. Now you can
setup the package manager and update it. This will work same as any
other Linux environment.

### References

-   Visit the manual page - `man chroot`
-   Guide to [rootstock](http://technoreview.net/2011/10/using-rootstock.html)
-   Why FreeBSD prefers [jail](http://www.freebsd.org/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/books/handbook/jails-intro.html) instead of `chroot`?
